---
layout: post
title: Introducing Rubinius X
author: Brian Shirai
---

Today, I'm announcing the [Rubinius X](http://x.rubini.us) project. Please read
about the details at the website. Here's why I started the project.

Ruby is falling out of favor. Business is over its dalliance with Ruby. No major
startup is lauding their use of Ruby and existing businesses are migrating away
or simply writing new applications in a different language. The few exceptions
prove the rule.

Businesses care about providing customers value so the businesses earn profits.
That's the harsh reality. Ruby is failing to help businesses engage customers.
It is seen as inefficient and inferior to other languages.

It's not true that people are leaving Ruby because the language is no longer
new. Javascript is not new and it's not a particularly good language. People
use it because it helps them solve problems. Java is also not new and many
people dislike writing Java code. But Java is evolving and businesses pay a lot
of people to write Java. No business is rewriting their Java applications in
Ruby because the developers are happier.

Ruby has great potential to help businesses compete in tumultuous markets by
reducing the cost to experiment with products that may interest consumers. It
has _potential_ but fundamental things about Ruby must change. Simply writing
some libraries or a new framework like Rails isn't enough.

I _really_ want Ruby to be a language that businesses choose so that people who
are happy writing Ruby will have a job. I'm going to test whether this is
possible and I hope you will help.

I want to thank a number of people who have inspired me: [Yehuda
Katz](https://twitter.com/wycats), [James Coglan](https://twitter.com/jcoglan),
[Gary Bernhardt](https://twitter.com/garybernhardt), [Evan
Phoenix](https://twitter.com/evanphx), [Wilson
Bilkovich](https://twitter.com/defiler), [Rich
Hickey](https://twitter.com/richhickey), [Michael
Bernstein](https://twitter.com/mrb_bk), [Gerlando
Piro](https://twitter.com/gpxl), and many other.
